The following is a conversation with the economist Ludwig von Mises. Ludwig Heinrich Edler von Mises (September 29, 1881-October 10, 1973) was one of the most notable economists and social philosophers of the 20th century. In the course of a long and productive life, he developed an integrated and deductive economic science based on the fundamental axiom that human beings act intentionally to achieve desired goals. Although his economic analysis itself was "value-free" - in the sense of being irrelevant to the values held by economists - Mises concluded that the only viable economic policy for the human race was a policy of unrestricted laissez-faire, free markets and the unfettered exercise of private property rights, with government strictly limited to the defense of person and property within its territorial scope.
For Mises was able to demonstrate (a) that the expansion of free markets, the division of labor and the investment of private capital is the only possible path to prosperity and the flourishing of the human race; (b) that socialism would be disastrous for a modern economy because the absence of private ownership of land and capital goods precludes any rational pricing, or estimation of costs, and (c) that government intervention, besides hindering and paralyzing the market, would prove counterproductive and cumulative, leading inevitably to socialism unless the whole fabric of interventions were repealed.
With these views, and clinging to the truth indomitably in the face of a century increasingly devoted to statism and collectivism, Mises became famous for his "intransigence" in insisting on a non-inflationary gold standard and laissez-faire.

Person:ADVERTISING

Mises: it is a widespread fallacy that skillful advertising can talk the consumers into buying everything that the advertiser wants them to buy. The consumer is, according to this legend, simply defenseless against high-pressure advertising. If this were true, success or failure in business would depend on the mode of advertising only.

Human Action, p. 317; p. 321

The tricks and artifices of advertising are available to the seller of the better product no less than to the seller of the poorer product. But only the former enjoys the advantage derived from the better quality of his product.

Human Action, p. 318; p. 321

Person: AMERICA

Mises: It is an enormous simplification to speak of the American mind. Every American has his own mind. It is absurd to ascribe any achievements and virtues or any misdeeds and vices of individual Americans to America as such. . . . What makes the American people different from any other people is the joint effect produced by the thoughts and actions of innumerable uncommon Americans.

Theory and History, pp. 191–92

Used to the conditions of a capitalistic environment, the average American takes it for granted that every year business makes something new and better accessible to him. Looking backward upon the years of his own life, he realizes that many implements that were totally unknown in the days of his youth and many others which at that time could be enjoyed only by a small minority are now standard equipment of almost every household. He is fully confident that this trend will prevail also in the future. He simply calls it the American way of life and does not give serious thought to the question of what made this continuous improvement in the supply of material goods possible.

Economic Freedom and Interventionism, p. 7

The most serious dangers for American freedom and the American way of life do not come from without.

Economic Freedom and Interventionism, p. 101

There is no use in deceiving ourselves. American public opinion rejects the market economy, the capitalistic free enterprise system that provided the nation with the highest standard of living ever attained. Full government control of all activities of the individual is virtually the goal of both national parties.

Economic Freedom and Interventionism, p. 157

Person: ANIMALS

Mises: The nonhuman animals never proceed beyond instinctive urges and conditioned reflexes.

The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science, p. 49

Person: WORKERS

Mises: Workers and consumers are, of course, identical.

On the Manipulation of Money and Credit, p. 179

The laborer is an entrepreneur in so far as his wages are determined by the price the market allows for the kind of work he can perform. This price varies according to the change in conditions in the same way in which the price of every other factor of production varies.

Human Action, p. 255; p. 254

The American worker is badly mistaken when he believes that his high standard of living is due to his own excellence.

Planning for Freedom, p. 136

The improvement of well-being brought about by capitalism made it possible for the common man to save and thus to become in a modest way himself a capitalist.

Planning for Freedom, p. 160

Everybody is eager to charge for his services and accomplishments as much as the traffic can bear. In this regard there is no difference between the workers, whether unionized or not, the ministers and teachers on the one hand and the entrepreneurs on the other hand. Neither of them has the right to talk as if he were Francis d’Assisi.

Planning for Freedom, p. 145

A great part of the capital at work in American enterprises is owned by the workers themselves and by other people with modest means.

Economic Policy, p. 86

In the market economy the worker sells his services as other people sell their commodities. The employer is not the employee’s lord. He is simply the buyer of services which he must purchase at their market price.

Human Action, p. 629; pp. 633–34

